There are probably many file types that you're familiar with
working with as a data scientist or software engineer;
XML, JSON, and CSV are some common ones.
In this lesson, we're just going to add DICOM right to that list.
So now that you know what a DICOM is and why it's important,
we'll learn about how to extract relevant information
from a DICOM image and then explore different components of it.
There are many different libraries to work with DICOM in different programming languages.
Since this course will be completely in Python,
we'll employ something called the Pydicom package.
With the Pydicom package,
dcmread command is used to read in a DICOM file.
If we read a DICOM file into this variable called my_dicom,
we now have all of the DICOM attributes stored in a single variable called my_dicom.
You can see here that my DICOM has an attribute called pixel
data that contains an array of pixels representing the medical image.
We can access the actual pixel data of
the image through this DICOM's pixel data attribute.
See how this is returned as a standard 2D NumPy array?
That's great because we already know how to work with this as data scientists.
So we can use something like
matplotlib's imshow library to easily
plot the pixel data from this DICOM in just a single line.
There. We just went from a DICOM file to an image that you
can see and manipulate in a Jupyter Notebook in only three steps.
Imshow tells us the width and height of the image also,
which we can see is a square of 1024 by 1024 pixels.
This dimension information was actually also stored somewhere else in the DICOM header.
Going back, you can see these DICOM attributes called rows and
columns tell you that this image has a shape of 1024 by 1024.
So let's start looking at some of our images.
Good practice when working with a new set of images is to actually look at them.
Usually, we can't do this for all of our images because our data sets are large,
so one technique you can use is to perform
random spot checks of your data by choosing several random images and visualizing them.
Some important things to look for in this process regarding abnormalities are;
foreign object artifacts and motion.
In the left image here,
you can see lots of wires in this patient's chest,
which we would refer to as a foreign body in an image.
You can also see a set of vertical lines that look like a grid running through the image,
which actually occur when the X-ray machine is not calibrated properly.
In the image on the right,
you can see that the spine looks very blurry
because the patient moved while the X-ray was taken.
Depending on how frequently you see artifacts
like this in your images and how consistent they are,
you may choose to develop
preprocessing algorithms to remove images with certain types of artifacts.
After the first check,
we want to dive deep and get a general sense of
what this type of medical imaging in our data set looks like.
Here are the questions that I would usually ask myself.
First, is it a grayscale or RGB image?
Next, generally what parts of the body are present in the images?
Do images from different classes look particularly different?
Finally, what's the intensity range of the images?
As we've learned before,
remember that each image consists of pixels with all different intensities.